docs: stateful firewall and conntrack requirements for SED reliability (#591)
matter-js/matterjs-server: docs/os_requirements.md

sysctl -w net.ipv6.conf.wlan0.accept_ra_rt_info_max_plen=64
```

**DO NOT** rely on `sysctl -w` alone if NetworkManager or systemd-networkd manages the interface — they override runtime sysctl values. Set the values in the network manager's own configuration files (or on the connection profile) so they survive interface restarts.

If your system has IPv6 forwarding enabled (not recommended, see above), you'll
have to use `2` for the accept_ra variable. See also the [Thread Border Router - Bidirectional IPv6 Connectivity and DNS-Based Service Discovery codelab](https://openthread.io/codelabs/openthread-border-router#6).

### Multiple Thread Border Routers (multi-TBR)

**DO NOT** apply conntrack-based firewall rules to traffic **forwarded** between the Thread interface and the LAN on a Thread Border Router itself, when multiple TBRs share the same Thread network. A single Matter flow can ingress one TBR and egress another, so each TBR's conntrack only ever sees half the flow and will drop it.

> This applies only to the TBR's forwarding/router role. It does **not** affect conntrack on the Matter Server's own host (see [Stateful firewalls](#stateful-firewalls-host-vm-hypervisor) below) — there, both directions terminate at the same kernel and conntrack works correctly.

Reviewer: Ah yeah make sense:

```suggestion
This applies only to the TBR's forwarding/router role. It does **not** affect conntrack on the Matter Server's own host (see [Stateful firewalls](#stateful-firewalls-host-vm-hypervisor) below) — there, traffic of both directions are observed by the same firewall which makes conntrack work correctly.
```

**DO** check `nf_conntrack_udp_timeout_stream` and raise it to at least `1800` (we recommend `3600`) on every kernel that filters Matter traffic:

```sh
# Skip if no stateful firewall is in the path. Otherwise:
sysctl net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_udp_timeout_stream 2>/dev/null
# Absent / "unknown key" → conntrack module not loaded → nothing to do.
# Present and < 1800 → raise it:
sudo sysctl -w net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_udp_timeout_stream=3600
echo 'net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_udp_timeout_stream = 3600' \
  | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/99-matter.conf
# Present and ≥ 1800 → done.
```

**DO** apply this on the kernel that actually filters the packets:

- Bare-metal: the host itself.
- VM with hypervisor firewall (e.g. Proxmox per-VM firewall, vSphere DFW): the **hypervisor** kernel. Setting it inside the guest has no effect.
- Docker on Linux with firewalld (Fedora/RHEL default) or ufw (Ubuntu, when enabled): the Docker **host**.
- Home Assistant OS via the Supervisor: usually fine out of the box. Only worry if you have added a custom firewall layer.

**DO NOT** filter Matter UDP traffic by destination port. The controller binds an ephemeral port, and device source ports also vary.

> **DO NOT** pin firewall rules to UDP/5540. Most devices use it, but not all.

Reviewer: In my mind, the Controller is typically the one initiating initial traffic, so if we setup a stateful firewall, then we'd do this based on traffic originating from the Matter server. Now that the originating port is ephemeral make sense, and that is the one connection tracking needs to remember.

But isn't the destination port spec mandated? Or can it be different depending on mDNS?

I feel if we can't rely on source and destination port, then there is not much we can go after to even setup a firewall 😅

Author: In fact 5540 is "just" the default assigned port for matter, but basically the  port to use is variable and can change and all that matters is that MDNS announces are correct. So basically nothing we can rely on for any side. Sure 99,x% will be 5540 but not 100%

Reviewer: Right ok. Maybe we can add the information that while 5540 is the IANA assigned port, devices are free to choose a different port which they will announce in their mDNS announcements.

```suggestion
**DO NOT** filter Matter UDP traffic by destination port. The controller binds an ephemeral port, and device source ports also vary.

**DO NOT** pin firewall rules to UDP/5540. While 5540 is the IANA-assigned Matter port and is commonly used, the Matter specification does not require devices to use a single predetermined well-known port. A Matter node may listen on a different UDP port and advertise that port through its mDNS/DNS-SD service records. Controllers are expected to use the advertised port rather than assuming 5540.
```

**DO** check `nf_conntrack_udp_timeout_stream` and raise it to at least `1800` (we recommend `3600`) on every kernel that filters Matter traffic:

```sh
# Skip if no stateful firewall is in the path. Otherwise:
sysctl net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_udp_timeout_stream 2>/dev/null
# Absent / "unknown key" → conntrack module not loaded → nothing to do.
# Present and < 1800 → raise it:
sudo sysctl -w net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_udp_timeout_stream=3600
echo 'net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_udp_timeout_stream = 3600' | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/99-matter.conf
# Present and ≥ 1800 → done.
```

**DO** apply this on the kernel that actually filters the packets:

- Bare-metal: the host itself.
- VM with hypervisor firewall (e.g. Proxmox per-VM firewall, vSphere DFW): the **hypervisor** kernel. Setting it inside the guest has no effect.
- Docker on Linux with firewalld (Fedora/RHEL default) or ufw (Ubuntu, when enabled): the Docker **host**.

> - Home Assistant OS via the Supervisor: usually fine out of the box. Only worry if you have added a custom firewall layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Home Assistant OS: Configured correctly out of the box. Only worry if you have added a custom firewall layer (e.g. VM with hypervisor firewall).
```

**DO NOT** filter Matter UDP traffic by destination port. The controller binds an ephemeral port, and device source ports also vary.

**DO NOT** pin firewall rules to UDP/5540. While 5540 is the IANA-assigned Matter port and is commonly used, the Matter specification does not require devices to use a single predetermined well-known port. A Matter node may listen on a different UDP port and advertise that port through its mDNS/DNS-SD service records. Controllers are expected to use the advertised port rather than assuming 5540.

> If you must filter, scope rules by source IPv6 prefix (Thread ULA + OMR prefix) or by interface — never by port.

Reviewer 2: If you must filter, scope rules by network interface or by source IPv6 prefix (Thread ULA + OMR prefix) — never by port. On OTBR, `ot-ctl prefix` lists the OMR prefix (look for the `paros` flags).

> Diagnostic sentinel: a per-instance firewall chain drop counter climbing in step with battery-device report cycles while your "Matter" ACCEPT rule shows zero hits → conntrack timeout is the cause.

Reviewer 2: Diagnostic sentinel: a per-instance firewall chain drop counter climbing in step with battery-device report cycles while your "Matter" ACCEPT rule shows zero hits → conntrack timeout is the cause. To confirm, run `conntrack -L | grep <controller-ip>` on the filtering kernel — each Matter flow shows its remaining UDP timeout in seconds. The `[ASSURED]` flag plus the countdown is the unambiguous tell.
